vmo overcommit and optimization page (#10405)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/vm-management/vmo_overcommit_memory_optimization.md

Reviewer: Consider mentioning this page in https://docs.spectrocloud.com/vm-management/

---
sidebar_label: "Overcommit & Memory Optimization"

> title: "VM Overcommitment & Memory Optimization"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sidebar_label: "Overcommit and Memory Optimization"
title: "VM Overcommitment and Memory Optimization"
```
Style guide: "Don't use `&` (ampersand) as a conjunction. Use the word `and` instead."

description: "Learn about Palette VMO pack and the architecture behind it."
hide_table_of_contents: false
sidebar_position: 1
tags: ["vmo", "architecture"]
---

> Virtual Machine Orchestrator (VMO) enables higher VM density on existing infrastructure by leveraging memory overcommit

Reviewer 2: We should tie these two together: https://deploy-preview-10405--docs-spectrocloud.netlify.app/vm-management/create-manage-vm/advanced-topics/vm-oversubscription/ 

Obviously, since VMO v1 is being deprecated, not intricately, but some sort of x-ref/admonition.

Author: So this doc would apply to both versions (AFAIK). Do you think having [this](https://docs.spectrocloud.com/vm-management/create-manage-vm/advanced-topics/vm-oversubscription/) as a reference at the bottom would be helpful? Both docs cover similar info but the other one has specific steps for VMO 1.0

and CPU optimization techniques, per-VM optimizations, and kernel-level memory deduplication.

This ability allows operators to run more virtual machines per host while reducing physical infrastructure costs. To

> help achieve higher density and resource optimization, there are five features you can use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and CPU optimization techniques, per-VM optimizations, and kernel-level memory deduplication. These methods allow operators to run more virtual machines per host while reducing physical infrastructure costs. To
help achieve higher density and resource optimization, there are several features you can use.
```

Five > several (reduces doc maintenance)

## Quick Reference

| Feature                                              | Scope                                            | Configuration Location |
| ---------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ | ---------------------- |
| [Memory overcommit](#memory-overcommit)              | [Cluster](#cluster-level-configuration-vmo-pack) | VMO Pack               |
| [KSM](#kernel-same-page-merging-ksm)                 | [Cluster](#configure-ksm)                        | VMO Pack               |
| [CPU pinning](#cpu-pinning-performance-optimization) | [Cluster](#cluster-level-configuration-vmo-pack) | VMO Pack               |
| [Headless mode](#headless-mode)                      | VM                                               | UI                     |

> | [Guest memory tuning](#per-vm-optimization-settings) | VM                                               | YAML                   |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Optimization Features

VMO provides optimization at two levels:
- **Cluster level** - Memory overcommit, KSM, and CPU pinning control how
physical resources are shared across all VMs. 
- **Individual VM level** - Guest memory tuning and headless mode reduce
per-VM overhead.

| Feature                                              | Scope | Advantages                                      | Disadvantages                                   |
| ---------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- | --- |
| [Memory overcommit](#memory-overcommit)    | [Cluster](#cluster-level-memory-settings]          | Low VM density due to unused reserved memory.        | Risk of contention under peak load.           |
| [KSM](#kernel-same-page-merging)           [Cluster](#configure-ksm)            | Duplicate memory pages across similar VMs           | CPU overhead from continuous page scanning.   |
| [CPU pinning](#cpu-pinning-performance-optimization)    | [Cluster](#cluster-level-memory-settings]                      | Unpredictable latency from CPU scheduling.           | Pinned cores are unavailable to other VMs.   |
| [Headless mode](#headless-mode)          | VM            | Wasted memory on unused graphical devices.           | No VNC console access.                        | VM |
| [Guest memory tuning](#per-vm-guest-memory-settings) | Rigid memory allocation that ignores actual usage.   | Guest may experience pressure under load.     |
```

I like this table :D But to help someone new (*cough cough*) know which one may be best for them, perhaps an enhanced version like so they have an idea of what might be relevant to them?

### Memory Overcommit

Memory is typically the first resource constrained in VM-dense environments. Overcommit strategies can increase VM
density per host, reduce hardware costs, and improve overall resource utilization. However, memory overcommitment
introduces trade-offs, including potential resource contention, and requires workload awareness and regular monitoring.

> Memory overcommit allows allocating more virtual memory to VMs than physically exists on a host. For example, if you

Reviewer 2: I would put this paragraph first, as it's a good introduction into what overcommit is

latency.

Memory tiering, using NVMes, is a newer, proactive mechanism that migrates inactive data to faster storage to free up
memory. This feature is transparent to the VMs, and can help improve VM density. This feature requires
[vSphere 9](https://techdocs.broadcom.com/us/en/vmware-cis/vsphere/vsphere/9-0/vsphere-resource-management/memory-tiering-over-nvme.html).

:::info

Memory tiering has different names, depending on the virtualization platform. This may be called memory overcommit
acceleration, swap-to-fast storage, or persistent/storage-class memory. Check with your virtualization vendor to
determine what features are available for proactive memory management.

:::

### KubeVirt Constraint

VMO is built on KubeVirt. This allows VMO to run VMs as Kubernetes pods. Memory for the VMs is controlled via Kubernetes
requests and limits. Currently, there is no native VM-level dynamic memory reclamation built into KubeVirt.

:::warning

KubeVirt does not support [balloon drivers](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/compute/node_overcommit/). This is an
upstream limitation, not a VMO-specific constraint.

> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Traditional Memory Handling

Virtualization platforms use different techniques to manage memory pressure:

- **Memory ballooning** - Enables a hypervisor to dynamically reclaim unused memory from VMs through a guest driver. The guest OS releases unneeded memory and leverages its local swap file, which can introduce latency.

- **Memory tiering (NVMe storage)** - Migrates inactive data to faster storage to free
  memory. This is transparent to VMs and requires platforms such as
  [vSphere 9](https://techdocs.broadcom.com/us/en/vmware-cis/vsphere/vsphere/9-0/vsphere-resource-management/memory-tiering-over-nvme.html).

:::info

Memory tiering has different names depending on the virtualization platform. It may be called memory overcommit
acceleration, swap-to-fast storage, or persistent/storage-class memory.

:::

### VMO Memory Handling

VMO is built on [KubeVirt](https://kubevirt.io/), which runs VMs as Kubernetes pods. Memory for VMs is controlled through [Kubernetes requests and limits (https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/). Because of this architecture, there is no native VM-level dynamic memory reclamation. Additionally, KubeVirt does not
support [balloon drivers](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/compute/node_overcommit/).

Instead, VMO provides memory optimization through cluster-wide overcommit ratios, per-VM guest memory tuning, and Kernel Same-Page Merging (KSM).
```

A better way to frame this may be how traditional methods handle memory vs how VMO does

> ### Cluster-Level Configuration (VMO Pack)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Cluster-Level Memory Settings
```

The following settings apply to every VM on the cluster and are configured through the VMO pack values.

| Setting              | Description                                           | Default                        | Impact                                                                         |
| -------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `cpuAllocationRatio` | Controls ratio of vCPUs to physical CPUs              | 10:1 (default)                 | Higher ratios allow more VMs per host at the cost of potential CPU contention. |

> | `memoryOvercommit`   | Sets the percentage of memory overcommit cluster-wide | 100% (default - no overcommit) | Values >100% enable overcommit percentage per host                             |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Setting              | Description                                           | Default                        | Impact                                                                         |
| -------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `cpuAllocationRatio` | Controls ratio of vCPUs to physical CPUs.              | 10:1                 | Higher ratios allow more VMs per host at the cost of potential CPU contention. |
| `memoryOvercommit`   | Sets the percentage of memory overcommit cluster-wide. | 100% | Values >100% enable overcommit percentage per host.                             |
```

In the example below, the `cpuAllocationRatio` is set to 12 VMs to one PCPU, and `memoryOvercommit` is configured for

> 1.5x of the physical RAM per host.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the example below, the `cpuAllocationRatio` is set to 12 VMs per physical CPU, and `memoryOvercommit` is configured for
1.5x of the physical RAM per host.
```

```yaml
additionalDevConfig:
  cpuAllocationRatio: 12
  memoryOvercommit: 150
```

> ### Per-VM Optimization Settings

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Per-VM Guest Memory Settings
```

You can also do per-VM settings. These can be applied on individual VMs or, to ensure that all VMs created consistently
get optimization settings, applied to the settings of a template and provision VMs from the template. This ensures

> standardize configurations, avoids per-VM manual tuning, and ensures consistency across deployments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can apply per-VM memory settings to individual VMs or to a VM template so that all VMs provisioned from the template inherit consistent optimization settings.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### YAML Configuration
```

| Setting                           | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                            | UI Support      |
| --------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------- |
| `overcommitGuestOverhead`         | Instructs KubeVirt not to charge the VM's memory request for hypervisor overhead (typically ~100–200 MB per VM). Allows tighter resource packing.                                                                      | YAML only       |
| `autoattachGraphicsDevice: false` | Removes the virtual graphics/display device for VMs that don't need a console (headless mode servers). Saves exactly 16 MB per VM and also disables VNC access. This setting is appropriate for server workloads only. | Yes (UI toggle) |

> | `memory.guest > requests.memory`  | The VM's guest OS "sees" more RAM than Kubernetes has reserved for the pod. Allows the guest to use more memory than formally requested, at the operator's discretion.                                                 | Partial (YAML)  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Setting                           | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Location     |
| --------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------- |
| `overcommitGuestOverhead`         | Instructs KubeVirt not to charge the VM's memory request for hypervisor overhead (typically ~100–200 MB per VM). Allows tighter resource packing.                                                                      | YAML       |
| `memory.guest` and `requests.memory`  | The VM's guest OS can use more RAM than Kubernetes has reserved for the pod, at the operator's discretion.                                                 | YAML |
```

I think having a UI element in this table makes it more confusing. Maybe create two separate sections?

> The following is an example of per-VM memory configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following is an example of per-VM memory configuration. In this example, Kubernetes reserves 4 Gi for the pod, but the guest OS sees 6 Gi of available memory.
```

```json title=”Example VM Configuration”
spec:
  domain:
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: 4Gi
      limits:
        memory: 4Gi
    memory:
      guest: 6Gi
```

> ### Headless mode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Headless Mode
```

Enabling **Headless mode** can save 16 MB by disabling the graphical device. However, this also disables VNC access to

> the VM.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Enabling headless mode removes the virtual graphics device from a VM, saving 16 MB of memory per VM. This also disables VNC console access, so it is appropriate only for server workloads that do not require a graphical console.

You can enable headless mode through the Palette UI when creating or editing a VM. 
```

![Diagram from VMO CPU memory overcommitment doc](/vm-management_vmo_optimization_headless-mode-ui-4-9.webp)

> ## Kernel Same-page Merging (KSM)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Kernel Same-Page Merging (KSM)
```

[Kernel Same-page Merging (KSM)](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/virtualization_tuning_and_optimization_guide/chap-ksm)

> is a Linux kernel feature allows de-duplication of infrequently updated memory pages across VMs, and merges those to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is a Linux kernel feature allows deduplication of infrequently updated memory pages across VMs, and merges those to
```

free memory. This is especially effective when multiple VMs run the same OS image with the same application behavior.
This feature can result in additional CPU overhead from memory scanning.

### Configure KSM

You can configure KSM to run on all nodes or specific nodes. When enabling this feature, `virt-handler` enables KSM. The
nodes are labelled `kubevirt.io/ksm-enabled=true` so they are discoverable, and can be scheduled on KSM-enabled nodes.

:::warning

The setting is for `additionalConfig` and not `additionalDevConfig`.

:::

> Utilize the following to enable KSM on all nodes under `additionalConfig` in the VMO pack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the following YAML in your VMO pack to enable KSM on _all nodes_.
```

```yaml
additionalConfig:
  ksmConfiguration:
    nodeLabelSelector: {}
```

> Utilize the following to enable KSM on specific nodes under `additionalConfig` in the VMO pack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the following YAML in your VMO pack to enable KSM on _specific nodes_.
```

```yaml
additionalConfig:
  ksmConfiguration:
    nodeLabelSelector:
      matchLabels:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/worker: ""
```

## CPU Pinning (Performance Optimization)

> CPU Pinning, or CPU affinity, is the technique of dedicating one or more host Physical CPU (PCPU) cores to a specific

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CPU pinning, or CPU affinity, is the technique of dedicating one or more host physical CPU cores to a specific
```

> workload, preventing the operating system scheduler from migrating that workload. This eliminates the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
workload, preventing the OS scheduler from migrating that workload. This eliminates the
```

performance-degrading effects of context switching, cache misses, and resource contention.

> In a virtualized KubeVirt environment, this is achieved by integrating the VMI specification with the underlying host

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a virtualized KubeVirt environment, this is achieved by integrating the VirtualMachineInstance (VMI) specification with the underlying host
```
?

resource management provided by the Kubelet. The goal is to provide host-level performance characteristics to the VM. To

> implement CPU pinning, three main components need to be adjusted:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
implement CPU pinning, you must adjust the following components:
```

- the [kubelet](#adjust-the-kubelet)
- the [KubeVirt feature gates](#enable-kubevirt-feature-gates)

> - the [VMI specification](#virtualmachineinstance-vmi-specification)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Kubelet](#adjust-the-kubelet)
- [KubeVirt feature gates](#enable-kubevirt-feature-gates)
- [VMI specification](#virtualmachineinstance-vmi-specification)
```

### Adjust the Kubelet

The Kubelet on the host node must be configured to enable static, exclusive resource allocation. This sets the
foundation for a Guaranteed Quality-of-Service (QoS) environment.

| Setting                      | Value                         | Impact                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| ---------------------------- | ----------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `cpu-manager-policy`         | `static`                      | Enables the CPU Manager to reserve exclusive CPU cores for Guaranteed QoS pods.                                                                                                                |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `cpu-manager-policy`         | `static`                      | Enables the CPU Manager to reserve exclusive CPU cores for [Guaranteed QoS pods](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/quality-service-pod/).                                                                                                                |
```

> | `cpu-manager-policy-options` | `full-pcpus-only=true`        | Ensures that only full physical cores (PCPUs) are allocated, preventing allocation of individual hyper-threads from the same core to different workloads, thereby maintaining cache isolation. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `cpu-manager-policy-options` | `full-pcpus-only=true`        | Ensures that only full physical cores are allocated, preventing allocation of individual hyper-threads from the same core to different workloads, thereby maintaining cache isolation. |
```

| `memory-manager-policy`      | `static`                      | Enables memory alignment with the dedicated CPU resources (NUMA affinity).                                                                                                                     |

> | `topology-manager-policy`    | `single-numa-node`            | CRITICAL: Forces all resources (CPU, memory, devices) required by a pod/VMI to be allocated from a single NUMA node to minimize inter-node latency.                                            |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `topology-manager-policy`    | `single-numa-node`            | Forces all resources (CPU, memory, devices) required by a pod/VMI to be allocated from a single NUMA node to minimize inter-node latency.                                            |
```

> | `topology-manager-scope`     | `pod`                         | Applies the single-numa-node policy at the VMI (Pod) level.                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `topology-manager-scope`     | `pod`                         | Applies the `single-numa-node` policy at the VMI (pod) level.                                                                                                                                    |
```

> | `reserved-memory`            | `0:memory=<reservedMemory>Mi` | Defines a configurable reserved memory region on a specific NUMA node (for example, node 0) for the operating system and Kubelet operations, protecting system stability.                      |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `reserved-memory`            | `0:memory=<reservedMemory>Mi` | Defines a configurable reserved memory region on a specific NUMA node (for example, node 0) for the OS and Kubelet operations, protecting system stability.                      |
```

### Enable KubeVirt Feature Gates

> The KubeVirt operator configuration must explicitly enable features that allow the virtualization layer to interact with

Reviewer 2: Point them here, maybe? https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/cluster_admin/activating_feature_gates/

the Kubelet's advanced resource managers. Specifically, enable `NUMA` and `CPUManager`.

### VirtualMachineInstance (VMI) Specification

The VMI manifest defines the exact CPU topology and resource requirements that trigger the CPU pinning mechanism. To

> achieve Guaranteed QoS and subsequent pinning, the VMI requests must equal limits for both CPU and Memory. In addition,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
achieve Guaranteed QoS and subsequent pinning, the VMI requests must equal limits for both CPU and memory. In addition,
```

the host node must have sufficient free, unreserved CPU and memory resources on a single NUMA node to satisfy the VMI
requirements.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachineInstance
spec:
  domain:
    cpu:
      dedicatedCpuPlacement: true
      numa:
        guestMappingPassthrough: {}
      model: host-passthrough
      cores: 2
      sockets: 1
      threads: 1
    memory:
      hugepages:
        pageSize: 2Mi
    resources:
      limits:
        cpu: 3
        memory: 8Gi
      requests:
        cpu: 3
        memory: 8Gi
.....

```

:::tip

Requests and limits must be equal to achieve Guaranteed QoS.

:::

## Best Practices

Keep a few general best practices to keep in mind. It is best to start with conservative overcommit (120–150%) for
memory, and increase it gradually overtime. Enable headless mode for server workloads to meaningfully reduce memory
usage, and KSM for homogeneous workloads can further increase these benefits.

It is important to monitor the environment for memory pressure and Out-Of-Memory (OOM) events. Additionally, real-time

> applications and memory-intensive databases may not benefit from these adjustments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider the following guidance when planning overcommit and optimization strategies:

- **Start conservatively** - Begin with memory overcommit at 120–150% and increase gradually based on observed behavior.

- **Monitor for memory pressure** - Watch for Out-Of-Memory (OOM) events and pod evictions. Overcommit without monitoring can cause cascading failures.

- **Use headless mode for server workloads** - Saving 16 MB per VM compounds meaningfully at scale, and server workloads rarely need VNC access.

- **Enable KSM for homogeneous environments** - KSM provides the highest benefit when many VMs share the same OS image and application stack.

- **Reserve CPU pinning for latency-sensitive workloads** - Pinned CPUs are unavailable to other VMs, so use this only where predictable performance is a requirement.

- **Avoid overcommitting memory for real-time or database workloads** - Applications with consistent high memory utilization do not benefit from overcommit and may experience instability.
```

A list would make it easier to digest.

---
sidebar_label: "Overcommit and Memory Optimization"
title: "VM Overcommitment and Memory Optimization"
description: "Learn about Palette VMO pack and the architecture behind it."
hide_table_of_contents: false
sidebar_position: 1
tags: ["vmo", "architecture"]
---

Virtual Machine Orchestrator (VMO) enables higher VM density on existing infrastructure by leveraging memory overcommit
and CPU optimization techniques, per-VM optimizations, and kernel-level memory deduplication. These methods allow
operators to run more virtual machines per host while reducing physical infrastructure costs. To help achieve higher

> density and resource optimization, there are several features you can use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
operators to run more VMs per host while reducing physical infrastructure costs. 

To help achieve higher density and resource optimization, there are several features you can use.
```

Maybe? Makes a better bridge for next section.

## Optimization Features

> VMO provides optimization at two levels:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
VMO provides memory optimization at two levels:
```

Ah, I love rereading with fresh eyes and ☕️

> - **Cluster level** - Memory overcommit, KSM, and CPU pinning control how physical resources are shared across all VMs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Cluster level** - Memory overcommit, Kernel Same-Page Merging (KSM), and CPU pinning control how physical resources are shared across all VMs.
```

| ---------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------- |
| [Memory overcommit](#memory-overcommit)              | [Cluster](#cluster-level-memory-settings) | Low VM density due to unused reserved memory.       | Risk of contention under peak load.         |
| [KSM](#kernel-same-page-merging-ksm)                 | [Cluster](#configure-ksm)                 | Duplicate memory pages across similar VMs           | CPU overhead from continuous page scanning. |
| [CPU pinning](#cpu-pinning-performance-optimization) | [Cluster](#cluster-level-memory-settings) | Unpredictable latency from CPU scheduling.          | Pinned cores are unavailable to other VMs.  |
| [Headless mode](#headless-mode)                      | VM                                        | Frees up wasted memory on unused graphical devices. | No VNC console access.                      |

> | [Guest memory tuning](#per-vm-guest-memory-settings) | VM                                        | Rigid memory allocation that ignores actual usage.  | Guest may experience pressure under load.   |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Feature                                              | Scope                                     | Advantages                                                                  | Disadvantages                                            |
| ---------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- |
| [Memory overcommit](#memory-overcommit)              | [Cluster](#cluster-level-memory-settings) | Increases VM density by reclaiming unused reserved memory.                   | Risks resource contention under peak load.               |
| [Kernel Same-Page Merging (KSM)](#kernel-same-page-merging)                     | [Cluster](#ksm-configuration)             | Reduces memory consumption by merging duplicate pages across similar VMs.   | Adds CPU overhead from continuous page scanning.         |
| [CPU pinning](#cpu-pinning-performance-optimization)                          | [Cluster](#cluster-level-memory-settings) | Eliminates unpredictable latency by dedicating cores to specific workloads. | Removes pinned cores from the shared scheduling pool.    |
| [Headless mode](#ui-configuration-headless-mode)                      | VM                                        | Frees up wasted memory on unused graphical devices.                         | Disables Virtual Network Computing (VNC) console access to the VM.                   |
| [Guest memory tuning](#per-vm-guest-memory-settings) | VM                                        | Allows guests to use more memory than formally reserved by Kubernetes.      | Exposes the guest to memory pressure under contention.   |
```

Reframed advantage/disadvantage columns to start with verbs.

### Memory Overcommit

Memory is typically the first resource constrained in VM-dense environments. Memory overcommit allows allocating more
virtual memory to VMs than physically exists on a host. For example, if you have a host with 64 GB of memory, and

> allocate 96 GB of memory to the VMs running on that host, you are overcommitting by 32 GB. This works because most VMs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
virtual memory to VMs than physically exists on a host. For example, if you have a host with 64 GB of memory and
you allocate 96 GB of memory to the VMs running on that host, you are overcommitting by 32 GB. This works because most VMs
```

However, memory overcommitment introduces trade-offs, including potential resource contention, and requires workload
awareness and regular monitoring.

### Traditional Memory Handling

Virtualization platforms use different techniques to manage memory pressure:

- **Memory ballooning** - Enables a hypervisor to dynamically reclaim unused memory from VMs through a guest driver. The
  guest OS releases unneeded memory and leverages its local swap file, which can introduce latency.

- **Memory tiering (NVMe storage)** - Migrates inactive data to faster storage to free memory. This is transparent to
  VMs and requires platforms such as
  [vSphere 9](https://techdocs.broadcom.com/us/en/vmware-cis/vsphere/vsphere/9-0/vsphere-resource-management/memory-tiering-over-nvme.html).

:::info

Memory tiering has different names depending on the virtualization platform. It may be called memory overcommit
acceleration, swap-to-fast storage, or persistent/storage-class memory.

:::

### VMO Memory Handling

VMO is built on [KubeVirt](https://kubevirt.io/), which runs VMs as Kubernetes pods. Memory for VMs is controlled
through [Kubernetes requests and limits

> (https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/). Because of this architecture, there is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
through [Kubernetes requests and limits](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/manage-resources-containers/). Because of this architecture, there is
```

no native VM-level dynamic memory reclamation. Additionally, KubeVirt does not support
[balloon drivers](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/compute/node_overcommit/).

Instead, VMO provides memory optimization through cluster-wide overcommit ratios, per-VM guest memory tuning, and Kernel

> Same-Page Merging (KSM).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead, VMO provides memory optimization through cluster-wide overcommit ratios, per-VM guest memory tuning, and KSM.
```

The following settings apply to every VM on the cluster and are configured through the VMO pack values.

| Setting              | Description                                            | Default | Impact                                                                         |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ | ------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `cpuAllocationRatio` | Controls ratio of vCPUs to physical CPUs.              | 10:1    | Higher ratios allow more VMs per host at the cost of potential CPU contention. |
| `memoryOvercommit`   | Sets the percentage of memory overcommit cluster-wide. | 100%    | Values >100% enable overcommit percentage per host.                            |

In the example below, the `cpuAllocationRatio` is set to 12 VMs per physical CPU, and `memoryOvercommit` is configured
for 1.5x of the physical RAM per host.

```yaml
additionalDevConfig:
  cpuAllocationRatio: 12
  memoryOvercommit: 150
```

### Per-VM Guest Memory Settings

You can apply per-VM memory settings to individual VMs or to a VM template so that all VMs provisioned from the template

> inherit consistent optimization settings.

Reviewer 2: Is this done from the VMO pack YAML or a Kubernetes manifest?

#### YAML Configuration

| Setting                              | Description                                                                                                                                       | Location |
| ------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- |
| `overcommitGuestOverhead`            | Instructs KubeVirt not to charge the VM's memory request for hypervisor overhead (typically ~100–200 MB per VM). Allows tighter resource packing. | YAML     |

> | `memory.guest` and `requests.memory` | The VM's guest OS can use more RAM than Kubernetes has reserved for the pod, at the operator's discretion.                                        | YAML     |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Setting                              | Description                                                                                                                                       | 
| ------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | 
| `overcommitGuestOverhead`            | Instructs KubeVirt not to charge the VM's memory request for hypervisor overhead (typically ~100–200 MB per VM). Allows tighter resource packing.  |
| `memory.guest` and `requests.memory` | The VM's guest OS can use more RAM than Kubernetes has reserved for the pod, at the operator's discretion.                                        | 
```

The following is an example of per-VM memory configuration. In this example, Kubernetes reserves 4 Gi for the pod, but
the guest OS sees 6 Gi of available memory.

```json title=”Example VM Configuration”
spec:
  domain:
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: 4Gi
      limits:
        memory: 4Gi
    memory:
      guest: 6Gi
```

> #### Headless Mode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### UI Configuration (Headless Mode)
```

To align with YAML Configuration heading

Enabling headless mode removes the virtual graphics device from a VM, saving 16 MB of memory per VM. This also disables
VNC console access, so it is appropriate only for server workloads that do not require a graphical console.

> You can enable headless mode through the Palette UI when creating or editing a VM.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can enable headless mode through the VMO UI when creating or editing a VM.
```

![Diagram from VMO CPU memory overcommitment doc](/vm-management_vmo_optimization_headless-mode-ui-4-9.webp)

## Kernel Same-Page Merging (KSM)

> [Kernel Same-page Merging (KSM)](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/virtualization_tuning_and_optimization_guide/chap-ksm)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[KSM](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/virtualization_tuning_and_optimization_guide/chap-ksm)
```

> is a Linux kernel feature allows deduplication of infrequently updated memory pages across VMs, and merges those to free

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is a Linux kernel feature allows deduplication of infrequently updated memory pages across VMs and merges those to free
```

> memory. This is especially effective when multiple VMs run the same OS image with the same application behavior. This

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
memory. This is especially effective when multiple VMs run the same OS image with the same application behavior. However, this
```

feature can result in additional CPU overhead from memory scanning.

### Configure KSM

You can configure KSM to run on all nodes or specific nodes. When enabling this feature, `virt-handler` enables KSM. The

> nodes are labelled `kubevirt.io/ksm-enabled=true` so they are discoverable, and can be scheduled on KSM-enabled nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
nodes are labelled `kubevirt.io/ksm-enabled=true` so they are discoverable and can be scheduled on KSM-enabled nodes.
```

:::warning

The setting is for `additionalConfig` and not `additionalDevConfig`.

:::

Use the following YAML in your VMO pack to enable KSM on _all nodes_.

```yaml
additionalConfig:
  ksmConfiguration:
    nodeLabelSelector: {}
```

Use the following YAML in your VMO pack to enable KSM on _specific nodes_.

```yaml
additionalConfig:
  ksmConfiguration:
    nodeLabelSelector:
      matchLabels:
        node-role.kubernetes.io/worker: ""
```

## CPU Pinning (Performance Optimization)

> CPU pinning, or CPU affinity, is the technique of dedicating one or more host physical CPU cores to a specific workload,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CPU pinning (also known as CPU affinity) is the technique of dedicating one or more host physical CPU cores to a specific workload,
```

preventing the OS scheduler from migrating that workload. This eliminates the performance-degrading effects of context
switching, cache misses, and resource contention.

> In a virtualized KubeVirt environment, this is achieved by integrating the VirtualMachineInstance (VMI) specification

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a virtualized KubeVirt environment, this is achieved by integrating the Virtual Machine Instance (VMI) specification
```

OK, I'm going with two words instead of one since it's being used in a general sense here (similar to Storage Class, Load Balancer) even though it's one word as a K8s resource.

with the underlying host resource management provided by the Kubelet. The goal is to provide host-level performance
characteristics to the VM. To implement CPU pinning, you must adjust the following components:

- [Kubelet](#adjust-the-kubelet)
- [KubeVirt feature gates](#enable-kubevirt-feature-gates)

> - [VMI specification](#virtualmachineinstance-vmi-specification)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Kubelet](#adjust-the-kubelet)
- [KubeVirt Feature Gates](#enable-kubevirt-feature-gates)
- [VMI Specification](#virtual-machine-instance-vmi-specification)
```

| `memory-manager-policy`      | `static`                      | Enables memory alignment with the dedicated CPU resources (NUMA affinity).                                                                                                             |
| `topology-manager-policy`    | `single-numa-node`            | Forces all resources (CPU, memory, devices) required by a pod/VMI to be allocated from a single NUMA node to minimize inter-node latency.                                              |
| `topology-manager-scope`     | `pod`                         | Applies the `single-numa-node` policy at the VMI (pod) level.                                                                                                                          |
| `reserved-memory`            | `0:memory=<reservedMemory>Mi` | Defines a configurable reserved memory region on a specific NUMA node (for example, node 0) for the OS and Kubelet operations, protecting system stability.                            |

### Enable KubeVirt Feature Gates

The KubeVirt operator configuration must explicitly enable

> [features](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/cluster_admin/activating_feature_gates/) that allow the virtualization layer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[feature gates](https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/cluster_admin/activating_feature_gates/) that allow the virtualization layer
```

to interact with the Kubelet's advanced resource managers. Specifically, enable `NUMA` and `CPUManager`.

> ### VirtualMachineInstance (VMI) Specification

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Virtual Machine Instance (VMI) Specification
```

The VMI manifest defines the exact CPU topology and resource requirements that trigger the CPU pinning mechanism. To
achieve Guaranteed QoS and subsequent pinning, the VMI requests must equal limits for both CPU and memory. In addition,
the host node must have sufficient free, unreserved CPU and memory resources on a single NUMA node to satisfy the VMI

> requirements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `VirtualMachineInstance` manifest defines the exact CPU topology and resource requirements that trigger the CPU pinning mechanism. To achieve Guaranteed QoS and enable pinning, the VMI `resources.requests` values for CPU and memory must be the same as the CPU and memory values listed in `resources.limits`. In addition,
the host node must have sufficient free, unreserved CPU and memory resources on a single NUMA node to satisfy the VMI
requirements.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachineInstance
spec:
  domain:
    cpu:
      dedicatedCpuPlacement: true
      numa:
        guestMappingPassthrough: {}
      model: host-passthrough
      cores: 2
      sockets: 1
      threads: 1
    memory:
      hugepages:
        pageSize: 2Mi
    resources:
      limits:
        cpu: 3
        memory: 8Gi
      requests:
        cpu: 3
        memory: 8Gi
.....

```

:::tip

Requests and limits must be equal to achieve Guaranteed QoS.

> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Redundant

## Best Practices

Consider the following guidance when planning overcommit and optimization strategies:

- **Start conservatively** - Begin with memory overcommit at 120–150% and increase gradually based on observed behavior.

- **Monitor for memory pressure** - Watch for Out-Of-Memory (OOM) events and pod evictions. Overcommit without
  monitoring can cause cascading failures.

- **Use headless mode for server workloads** - Saving 16 MB per VM compounds meaningfully at scale, and server workloads
  rarely need VNC access.

- **Enable KSM for homogeneous environments** - KSM provides the highest benefit when many VMs share the same OS image
  and application stack.

- **Reserve CPU pinning for latency-sensitive workloads** - Pinned CPUs are unavailable to other VMs, so use this only
  where predictable performance is a requirement.

- **Avoid overcommitting memory for real-time or database workloads** - Applications with consistent high memory
  utilization do not benefit from overcommit and may experience instability.

## Resources

> [Over-Commit Resources to Enhance VM Performance](./create-manage-vm/advanced-topics/vm-oversubscription.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I would get rid of this section and instead, on https://deploy-preview-10405--docs-spectrocloud.netlify.app/vm-management/create-manage-vm/advanced-topics/vm-oversubscription/ at the end of the intro, tell them something like: "For more information on memory and overcommit in VMO, refer to X" (and point them to this page).

---
sidebar_label: "Overcommit and Memory Optimization"
title: "VM Overcommitment and Memory Optimization"

> description: "Learn about Palette VMO pack and the architecture behind it."

Reviewer: Description should be more specific to overcommitment and memory

| Setting              | Description                                            | Default | Impact                                                                         |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------ | ------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `cpuAllocationRatio` | Controls ratio of vCPUs to physical CPUs.              | 10:1    | Higher ratios allow more VMs per host at the cost of potential CPU contention. |
| `memoryOvercommit`   | Sets the percentage of memory overcommit cluster-wide. | 100%    | Values >100% enable overcommit percentage per host.                            |

In the example below, the `cpuAllocationRatio` is set to 12 VMs per physical CPU, and `memoryOvercommit` is configured
for 1.5x of the physical RAM per host.

```yaml
additionalDevConfig:
  cpuAllocationRatio: 12
  memoryOvercommit: 150
```

### Per-VM Guest Memory Settings

You can apply per-VM memory settings to individual VMs or to a VM template so that all VMs provisioned from the template
inherit consistent optimization settings.

> ```json title="Example Per-VM Overcommit" {5}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml title="Example Per-VM Overcommit" {5}
```

spec:
  terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 30
  domain:
    resources:
      overcommitGuestOverhead: true
      requests:
        memory: 1024M
```

#### YAML Configuration

| Setting                              | Description                                                                                                                                       |
| ------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `overcommitGuestOverhead`            | Instructs KubeVirt not to charge the VM's memory request for hypervisor overhead (typically ~100–200 MB per VM). Allows tighter resource packing. |
| `memory.guest` and `requests.memory` | The VM's guest OS can use more RAM than Kubernetes has reserved for the pod, at the operator's discretion.                                        |

The following is an example of per-VM memory configuration. In this example, Kubernetes reserves 4 Gi for the pod, but
the guest OS sees 6 Gi of available memory.

> ```json title=”Example VM Configuration”

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml title=”Example VM Configuration”
```

spec:
  domain:
    resources:
      requests:
        memory: 4Gi
      limits:
        memory: 4Gi
    memory:
      guest: 6Gi
```

#### UI Configuration (Headless Mode)

Enabling headless mode removes the virtual graphics device from a VM, saving 16 MB of memory per VM. This also disables
VNC console access, so it is appropriate only for server workloads that do not require a graphical console.

You can enable headless mode through the VMO UI when creating or editing a VM.

![Diagram from VMO CPU memory overcommitment doc](/vm-management_vmo_optimization_headless-mode-ui-4-9.webp)

## Kernel Same-Page Merging (KSM)

> [KSM](https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/mm/ksm.html) is a Linux kernel feature allows deduplication of infrequently

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[KSM](https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/mm/ksm.html) is a Linux kernel feature that allows deduplication of infrequently
```

updated memory pages across VMs and merges those to free memory. This is especially effective when multiple VMs run the
same OS image with the same application behavior. However, this feature can result in additional CPU overhead from
memory scanning.

### Configure KSM

You can configure KSM to run on all nodes or specific nodes. When enabling this feature, `virt-handler` enables KSM. The

> nodes are labelled `kubevirt.io/ksm-enabled=true` so they are discoverable and can be scheduled on KSM-enabled nodes.

Reviewer: The [doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zmj75kmrETlo-6MKrZed8jdWVoV_DPRnOZQFksAJgrs/edit?tab=t.0) mentions 4 things that happen after KSM is enabled, but only 1 is mentioned here. Consider documenting all 4.

Reviewer: Actually, the 4th thing is a warning of what happens if ksmConfiguration is later removed. Consider including that in a `:::warning`.
